---
layout: post
title: "4 ways to improve government accessibility through open source"
date: 2020-10-5 08:00:00 -0800
author: mike-gifford
---
#### **How agencies can adopt an open source strategy to make their services more usable by people of all abilities**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1024/1*JIFhLNh1crkJXZJtZbCfnQ.jpeg)
Photo by [Tim
Mossholder](https://unsplash.com/@timmossholder?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/s/photos/open-
hand?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)

Government agencies, of all organizations, have perhaps the greatest
obligation to plan for the [accessibility of their
websites](https://www.usability.gov/what-and-why/accessibility.html) and
digital services. Beyond meeting compliance requirements for accessibility,
[mission-focused agencies](https://www.openaccessgovernment.org/digital-
accessibility-transforming-government/94962/) want to make sure the greatest
number of people — regardless of ability — can use and understand the
important content and services provided online.

There's a tendency to think only of permanently "disabled" people when we talk
about accessibility, but it's an issue that extends to a large portion of the
population. Temporary and situational disabilities can affect all of us from
time-to time — as we find ourselves with an injured hand or out on a sunny day
trying to read our phones. And of course, some of the people that most need
government services may also face some of the greatest barriers in accessing
digital content — such as English Language Learner immigrants, low-income
families with limited access to Internet devices, the aging population
receiving Medicare, or Veterans struggling with mental health challenges.

Meeting the needs of people with varying abilities and backgrounds is a multi-
layered issue requiring conscious decisions around technology and process in
order to get it right. This means government digital platforms should be built
with accessibility in mind, using modern tools and practices that will
constantly improve instead of falling out of date.

> Meeting the needs of people with varying abilities and backgrounds is a
> multi-layered issue requiring conscious decisions around technology and
> process.

CivicActions has long been a proponent of [open source
technologies](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a8fHgx9mE5U) and agile
practices, which provide many benefits to government agencies, including an
accessibility advantage. Here are four recommendations for an open source
strategy that will set agencies up for success in the goal of providing modern
and accessible digital services.

### Use tools that are ready-made for accessibility

It only makes sense to start on the right foot by using tools that have
already been tested for accessibility — otherwise you are beginning with a lot
of technical debt. Your team will be responsible for finding and fixing all
the errors, and continually monitoring anything that's built to make sure the
systems continue to be functional for groups that depend on you for
accessibility (e.g., people who use assistive technologies like screen
readers).

Open source platforms such as [Drupal](https://www.drupal.org/) (for website
content management) and the [U.S. Web Design
Standards](https://designsystem.digital.gov/) (USWDS) (for designing
government websites) are already evaluated against the [newly updated Section
508 requirements](https://www.section508.gov/blog/accessibility-news-the-
section-508-Update) and have been extensively tested against the World Wide
Web Consortium's (W3C) [Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0
AA](https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/wcag/). The combination of
these tools for government websites provides an accessibility boost from the
get-go. Accessibility is a complicated issue, so using platforms that are
continually maintained by the open source community is smarter than trying to
apply "quick fixes" to problems as they are discovered — which can put your
organization at risk.

> Open source platforms like Drupal and USWDS are built to meet accessibility
> standards as they evolve.

CivicActions engineers and designers have been working on the pairing of
Drupal and USWDS since the design standards were initially released, knowing
these open source tools would be a powerful combination for agencies looking
to bring their systems up to date. From presenting about the [benefits of this
pairing](https://medium.com/civicactions/pairing-drupal-uswds-v2-to-build-
better-government-websites-e2f44654fb2b) when building government sites, to
[co-maintaining a USWDS base theme](https://www.drupal.org/project/uswds) in
Drupal, we're committed to helping agencies make the most of these platforms
in their modernization efforts.

### Choose an agile approach

Whether you're modernizing a legacy system, building something new, or
improving current operations, an agile approach is best for keeping
accessibility at the forefront. This is our go-to process for any work with
government clients, because the iterative cycles allow barriers to be
identified and resolved early in the process — saving time and money in the
end. Agile also pairs well with an open source strategy, because open source
tools evolve constantly as improvements are made by people who are using them.

With all team members working in an agile manner:

  * Designers can quickly identify potential accessibility problems in their prototypes
  * Content authors can check for readability (and compatibility with assistive technology)
  * Developers can use automated accessibility tools to catch issues **before** code is committed to the repository

And this can all happen before clients even see prototypes, let alone before
huge systems are put in place that would be time-consuming and expensive to
fix if accessibility issues were uncovered later. Our years of experience with
open source tools (especially Drupal) have shown that agile allows for
comprehensive testing at every stage of a project in addition to the
opportunity to benefit from work that others have done — which improves the
overall accessibility, security, and usability of technology systems.

### Plan for the future

The web is evolving quickly. Browsers, standards, and use-cases change over
time. And agencies will increasingly see people accessing their websites and
services through new technologies that depend on [semantic
content](https://gathercontent.com/blog/whats-deal-structured-content) in
order to work well — which adds plenty of layers to the accessibility
challenge.

For example, Google search results glean information about organizations from
structured site content. The use of assistant technologies like Siri, Alexa,
and Google Home will make voice recognition a growing interface to consider
from an accessibility perspective. And Virtual / Augmented Reality will
continue to grow in popularity, meaning that government sites will need to be
accessible not just through home browsers, but through mobile devices, car
dashboards, home speakers, and other AI.

All this means that no "accessibility checklist" will ensure your site meets
its accessibility requirements next year, or in five years. So it's important
to view accessibility as a journey, not a destination. Agencies should plan
for the future by establishing a strong foundation that will allow them to
evolve their accessibility efforts for years to come — without having to scrap
old technologies and start over!

> Accessibility is a journey, not a destination.

One way to do this is through open source tools like Drupal and USWDS, which
are constantly improved as maintainers and organizations contribute updates
and fixes. As technology evolves, these tools keep up, making it easier to
maintain accessibility over time. That's part of the reason Drupal is trusted
by leading disability organizations like the National Federation of the Blind.
For government, as well, Drupal provides a platform for managing web content
that is **built** for accessibility and will continue to evolve along with the
online behavior of constituents.

### Be part of the community

Community contributions are the driving force that make open source tools so
adaptable. Unlike proprietary software that is owned and maintained by one
entity, open source tools are owned by everyone and can be improved by anyone.
More government organizations are adopting this open approach to technology as
a way to [share helpful code](https://www.cio.gov/2016/08/11/peoples-
code.html) with other agencies and the public — while also gaining a community
of support upstream as open source software libraries are continually updated.
Particularly with Drupal and USWDS, which are heavily used by government,
accessibility improvements are made whenever barriers to users are identified.
This makes it easier for all agencies using these tools to implement
accessibility best practices for their web content.

> Open source tools like Drupal and USWDS make it easier for agencies to
> implement accessibility best practices.

CivicActions has cultivated and contributed to open source communities for
over a decade. Their teams are actively using and improving Drupal and the
U.S. Web Design System, working with agencies to make government services more
accessible to everyone. Being part of these communities allows developers and
designers to stay familiar with issue queues, create and test patches, and
learn from others who are using the same systems in different ways — so we can
all shape these tools to be as functional, flexible, and useful as possible.

As governments seek to make accessibility a priority in today's digital world,
it makes sense to start with tools that are purpose-built to evolve along with
technology systems and to be part of communities that care deeply about
meeting the needs of all users. Open source tools like Drupal and the U.S. Web
Design System can help you stay compliant with accessibility regulations, but
also to lay a strong foundation for a future in which people of all abilities
can more easily benefit from the services you provide.

 _CivicActions delights in helping agencies adapt these tools to better
fulfill their missions._[ _Get in touch_](https://civicactions.com/contact)
_to talk about making government services more accessible with a forward-
thinking open source strategy._

![](https://medium.com/_/stat?event=post.clientViewed&referrerSource=full_rss&postId=8e20fabc7281)

* * *

[4 ways to improve government accessibility through open
source](https://medium.com/civicactions/4-ways-to-improve-government-
accessibility-through-open-source-8e20fabc7281) was originally published in
[CivicActions](https://medium.com/civicactions) on Medium, where people are
continuing the conversation by highlighting and responding to this story.

